Transcript for: eilertsen-2021_background.pdf

Source PDF: eilertsen-2021_background.pdf



--- Page 1 ---

Anna Maria Eilertsen
Improving the Usability of
Refactoring Tools for Software
Change Tasks
2021
Thesis for the degree of Philosophiae Doctor (PhD)
University of Bergen, Norway

--- Page 2 ---

Chapter 2
Background
Mind the Gap
— Transport for London
Refactoring has an almost thirty year history of study. In this chapter, I provide an
quick introduction to refactorings and refactoring tools before presenting an overview of
early work in refactoring in broad strokes, emphasizing the ideas that shaped the later
research. Then, I provide a more detailed description of work related to the usability of
refactoring tools for software changes and studies of how developers refactor. I present an
overview of the factors that have emerged from previous works as potentially impacting
developers’ choice of using or not using refactoring tools. Andﬁnally, I discuss studies
of software change tasks as they relate to the topics in this dissertation.
An early version of the discussion in this chapter was published elsewhere [36].
2.1 Refactoring: A Primer
This thesis relies upon knowledge of refactoring operations and refactoring tools. Here,
I provide a short primer on these topics. Additional relevant background can be found
in other literature [94, 47].
Torefactora program is to change its internal structure without altering its observable
behavior [94, 47]. Typically, refactorings are performed to make the program easier
to understand or change [47, 64, 112]. For example, the meaning of a function may
be clariﬁed by updating its name. Developers often refactor programs in the context

--- Page 3 ---

8 Background
Figure 2.1: IDEs like IntelliJ give developers access to invoke a refactoring menu directly
from the editor by right-clicking on a source code element. Rather than showing all the
refactorings that the IDE implements, the menu is populated with the refactorings that
are possible to invoke on the element that was clicked. Here, the menu was invoked by
clicking on a parameter of a method.
of a functional change [86, 74, 95, 35]. Despite the refactoring itself being behavior-
preserving, the overall goal of the change might be to implement new functionality orﬁx
a bug [104]. For example, if the behavior of a function is changed, its name might need
to be altered accordingly.
Arefactoring operationis a speciﬁc change pattern that often occurs during changes
to object-oriented 1 programs [94, 47]. For example, a developer can apply therename
operation to a method declaration to clarify its meaning. However, it is not enough to
change the declaration: in order to retain the program’s meaning, all callers must also
be updated to use the new name. If the developer makes this change manually, they
must locate and update all callers [47]. However, if the developer initiates therename
operation with a refactoring tool, then the tool can make the updates automatically.
Many refactoring operations are automated byrefactoring toolsfound in modern main-
stream IDEs such as IntelliJ [3] and Eclipse [1]. Figure 2.1 shows one refactoring menu
from IntelliJ2. Refactoring tools support software change tasks by automatically perform-
ing steps of the refactoring process that developers would otherwise have to do manually.
For example, the tool can automatically update all locations that are impacted by a refac-
toring, such as callers in the previousrenameexample. This is especially useful in cases
where the initial change impacts many locations (e.g., in the case of applyingrenameto
a method with many callers located in diﬀerentﬁles). In this case, a tool can save the
1When the program is not object-oriented, these changes are typically calledrestructuringrather
than refactoring [55].
2Throughout this thesis, I will use examples from the JetBrains IntelliJ IDE because it is represen-
tative of the support in mainstream IDEs. JetBrains is known for producing high-quality IDE support
for refactoring such as in the IntelliJ IDE for Java and the Visual Studio plugin ReSharper for C#.

--- Page 4 ---

2.1 Refactoring: A Primer 9
developer from slow and error-prone navigation, editing, and context-switching.
While this depiction of refactorings might evoke associations to simple textualﬁnd-
and-replace tools, implementing such tools are signiﬁcantly more diﬃcult. Consider a
developer that wants torenamea variable named i to be called foo. A tool that replaces
all is in the entire program text, with the string foo would not be considered useful as,
for example, every reference to the int-type would now be replace with the nonsensical
foont type. To ensure that a refactoring tool changes the correct code, it needs to operate
on a parsed version of the program. This typically entails operating an abstract syntax
tree (AST) or a similar data structure, like the Program Source Interface (PSI) type used
by IntelliJ [59]. The refactoring tool typically changes this AST or PSI representation
of the program and the textual source code is updated accordingly.
To ensure that the changes are safe and correct, a refactoring tool typically performs
condition checks[94, 22, 42]. Consider again the case of therenameoperation on a
method. If a developer attempts to give the method a name that already is deﬁned
in that scope, for example the name of a pre-existingﬁeld, then the resulting program
will fail to compile. Whilst this might be diﬃcult to identify in a manual process until
the refactoring is already applied, due to mechanisms like inheritance, a tool can easily
check this before the code is changed. If the name is already there, the tool can stop the
application and alert the programmer that the new method signature will collide with
an existing element.
For a running example of a refactoring, I introduce theremove-parameterrefactoring 3.
This refactoring removes a parameter from a method declaration and updates all callers
correspondingly. Its conditions are that the parameter is not used in the method’s body
and that the new signature does not collide with any other method signatures. Listing 2.1
shows a simple example of such a program and Listing 2.2 shows the result of applying
remove-parameterto that program.
3remove-parameteris sometimes considered part ofchange-signature[47, 3] and invoked through
thechange-signaturemenu option.

--- Page 5 ---

10 Background
Listing 2.1: A method bar with two parameters, and one caller, foo. The
parameter Y y is unused.
60 public boolean foo(A a) {
61 return bar(a.getX(), a.getY());
62}
63 public boolean bar(X x, Y y) {
64 return x.isBar();
65}
Listing 2.2: The unused parameter y was removed from bar and from its call
in foo.
60 public boolean foo(A a) {
61 return bar(a.getX());
62}
63 public boolean bar(X x) {
64 return x.isBar();
65}
If a developer wants to invoke a refactoring tool from an IDE, they can access a refac-
toring menu like the one shown in Figure 2.1 and select the desired refactoring from
the list. Next, a Conﬁguration View is presented, as shown in Figure 2.2. This view
lets the developer conﬁgure thechange-signaturerefactoring as aremove-parameter
refactoring. This view is typically shown as a popup over the code editor and blocks the
developer from making any changes to the source code while they are interacting with
the view.
Once the developerﬁnishes the conﬁguration, she can Preview the refactoring to see a list
of locations that will be changed, as shown in Figure 2.3. The developer may also click
Refactor to immediately apply the entire change without previewing it. In both cases,
the tool will check that refactoring’s conditions and present a problem view if it detects
any violations. Figure 2.4 shows such a view for theremove-parameterrefactoring. Also
in this case, the developer can apply the refactoring by clicking Continue in Figure 2.4.
In the Preview View, it is often possible to navigate to the identiﬁed locations and to
exclude locations from being updated, as shown in Figure 2.3. When the developer is sat-
isﬁed with the Preview, she may click Do Refactor to apply the refactoring. While some
implementations of Preview View (like Eclipse) prevent the developer from interacting
with the code, the one shown here, from IntelliJ, aﬀords the developer the opportunity

--- Page 6 ---

2.1 Refactoring: A Primer 11
Figure 2.2: The conﬁguration view ofchange-signaturein IntelliJ. Here, the developer
can conﬁgure the refactoring tool to applyremove-parameter. Once the developer has
ﬁnished the tool’s conﬁguration, she can click Refactor to make the tool attempt to apply
the refactoring. She can also choose to Preview the conﬁgured refactoring operation or
use Cancel to discard the refactoring. While this view is shown, it is not possible to edit
the source code shown in the editor behind the popup.
Figure 2.3: IntelliJ’s Preview view for an application ofchange-signatureto the
method getField. The tool is conﬁgured to remove a parameter from the method.
This Preview View shows all the 23 references that needs to be updated for the refactor-
ing to preserve behavior. For each reference, a user may choose to “exclude this usage
from processing”. The Preview View is shown in a paneø that allows editing the source
code; however, doing so will render the refactoring invalid and raise an error.

--- Page 7 ---

12 Background
Figure 2.4: Problem view for thechange-signatureas a popup over the conﬁguration
view. The condition checker has found two problems, both of which are going to lead to
compiler errors if the refactoring is applied. The user is given the option to learn more,
to cancel, or to continue the application despite the problems.

--- Page 8 ---

2.1 Refactoring: A Primer 13
Figure 2.5: If a developer alters the source code during the preview step of a refactoring
in IntelliJ, that refactoring can no longer be applied. Instead, this error is produced,
and the refactoring must be re-invoked and re-conﬁgured before application.
to alter the source code before continuing the refactoring. However, if they choose to do
so, the refactoring tool will prevent the application of the refactoring. In this case, the
developer is forced to re-initiate and re-conﬁgure the refactoring. Figure 2.5 shows the
error message that IntelliJ presents in such a situation. This is due to the tool’s reliance
of the code being unchanged to ensure that the refactoring and the conditions that has
been checked are still valid.
Once the refactoring is applied, the tool changes all the identiﬁed locations in the source
code according to its implementation, except any excluded locations.
Figure 2.6 illustrates the refactoring tool workﬂow supported by refactoring tools in
IDEs. It shows that after a developer invokes and conﬁgures a refactoring tool, the tool
transforms the source code according to that tool’s implementation. As the exact trans-
formation can vary [93], developers may be unable to correctly predict the outcome of a
tool invocation [92] and risk applying transformations that they did not intend [86, 126].
It can even be diﬃcult to inspect or verify the changes after they happen [40]. Regard-
less of how complex and distributed a change is, the tool performs the transformation
in a single, atomic step. The resulting all-or-nothing situation forces the developer to
choose between applying one atomic change for which they cannot predict the outcome,
or editing the code manually.
As indicated in Figure 2.3 and Figure 2.4, the mainstream refactoring tool lets the user
apply unsafe refactorings. In Figure 2.3, the user can exclude references from being
updated. In this case, these references might change the program’s behavior, either by
preventing compilation or by altering references. For example, if a parameter is removed
and one caller is excluded, as indicated in Figure 2.3, that caller will no longer bind to
the right method and the program will not compile. If a removed parameter is referred
to in the method body, as shown in Figure 2.4, a similar problem will arise. As another
possibility, if there existed aﬁeld with the same name in that class, the program might
still compile, but its behavior might have been changed.

--- Page 9 ---

14 Background
Figure 2.6: The design of most refactoring tools makes the developer “leave” the code
editing context (shown in blue) when invoking a tool and “return” either by applying an
entire transformation (right green arrow) to the source code or by discarding the change
(left red arrow). While interacting with the tool (gray box), the developer can inspect
and edit the upcoming refactoring (i.e., navigate the black lines). The Conﬁg(uration)
View is used to edit the refactoring. The tool can check for problems (�) and inform
the user about violated conditions (Problem View) and about the locations that will be
impacted (Preview View). If the change is discarded, no conﬁgurations, transformations,
or other information is retained.
2.2 Refactoring Tools: the Beginnings
Theﬁrst organized examination of refactorings were done by Opdyke [94] and Gris-
wold [55] in their dissertations in the early 1990s. Griswold described a number of
restructurings that could ease program maintenance without changing a program’s be-
havior, such asrename,extract-method, andinline-method. He also demonstrated
that these types of transformations could be automated. Opdyke studied the evolu-
tion of object-oriented programs in C++ and created a catalogue of restructurings, or
refactorings, that frequently occurred and were useful during the program’s evolution.
Included in the catalogue were the conditions under which each refactoring could be ap-
plied to a program written in C++ without altering its behavior. Shortly after, Roberts,
Brant, and Johnson implemented a number of these refactorings and their conditions in
the Smalltalk Refactoring Browser [104, 105].
These early works shaped much of the later research in two ways. Firstly, the speciﬁc
refactorings that were described, catalogued, and automated, are still largely the same
that are found in modern IDEs today [1, 3]. Secondly, the emphasis on preserving
program behavior is still considered as essential to the refactoring discipline. Despite the
incompleteness of Opdyke’s conditions [120], the idea of combining code transformation
with correctness checks has prevailed. In fact, the refactoring tools that are found in
modern IDEs also use condition checks to guard against erroneous applications.
The interest in refactoring was fueled by its promise of a faster and cheaper means
of evolving and improving object-oriented software. This was illustrated in Tokuda and
Batory’s study of refactoring-aided software evolution [120]. They selected two programs

--- Page 10 ---

2.2 Refactoring Tools: the Beginnings 15
that had been manually evolved by developers, and for each program, they selected two
versions of their design, the source and target state. Then, they attempted to use
refactoring operations to transform the source state into the target state. Based on this
study, they estimated how much time could have been saved if the two programs had
been evolved with the aid of tools that could automatically apply the refactorings rather
than with a manual approach. For one program, they estimated that the time could be
reduced from two days to two hours and for the other program, from two weeks to one
day. The possibility of such drastic improvements on developer’s productivity was an
enticing prospect and motivated the development of automated refactoring tools.
There are substantial technical challenges associated with implementing refactoring
tools [104]: they require non-trivial program analysis and transformation capabilities[59].
The details of correctness conditions and program transformations vary between lan-
guages which means that is diﬃcult to reuse tool components written for one program-
ming language in a tool targeting another. One example of this is the Refactoring
Browser. This was an early example of automated refactoring support but only sup-
ported Smalltalk. This tool could not be used to refactor programs that were written in
other languages, such as Java and C++.
In the late 1990s, there was consequently a sizable demographic of Java programmers
in the industry who had little or no support for automated applications of refactorings.
Instead, these practitioners were introduced to refactoring operations through Fowler’s
seminal book, Refactoring: Improving the Design of Existing Code [46]. This book
described how and when to apply a catalogue of refactoring operations. While this cat-
alogue largely contained the same ones as those described by Opdyke and Griswold and
the ones implemented in the Smalltalk tool, the descriptions were aimed at practition-
ers without tool support. The book used a natural language aimed at practitioners
to describe how to manually apply these operations. It also emphasized that the pro-
gram’s behavior should be preserved, but it recommends achieving this through small
and controlled code changes and frequently running a test suite.
In 2004, Mens and Tourw´ e presented theﬁrst survey of software refactorings [78] and
introduced a model of the refactoring process:
1. Identify where the software should be refactored.
2. Determine which refactoring(s) should be applied to the identiﬁed places.
3. Guarantee that the applied refactoring preserves behavior.
4. Apply the refactoring.

--- Page 11 ---

16 Background
5. Assess the eﬀect of the refactoring on quality characteristics of the software (e.g.,
complexity, understandability, maintainability) or the process (e.g., productivity,
cost, eﬀort).
6. Maintain the consistency between the refactored program code and other software
artifacts (such as documentation, design documents, requirements speciﬁcations,
tests, etc.).
At this point, there was already substantial research into how to implement and im-
prove refactoring tools. This research focused largely on technical improvements of the
tool’s ability to perform one or more of these steps. For example, researchers attempted
to create refactoring recommendation tools that could support steps 1-2 [62], worked on
implementing a wider variety of refactorings [107, 73, 104] (step 4) and implemented con-
dition checks [30, 119, 79] (step 3). Condition checks are important because they help
ensure that the program’s behavior is preserved. However, Mens and Tourw´ e described
that, in many cases, a formal guarantee for behavior preservation would cause tools to
be overly restrictive; Brant later made a similar observation [24]. Indeed, subsequent re-
search would develop to use refactoring either in the formal sense (e.g., [42, 107, 22, 116])
or in a more pragmatic way that included, for example, unsafe refactorings, bug-ﬁxes
and API-level changes (e.g., [67, 108, 72, 35]). The latter, pragmatic kind of refactoring
research is often more developer oriented and is the category to which the research in
this dissertation belongs.
Despite the inﬂuence of Mens and Tourw´ e’s model, it did not accurately describe the
workﬂow that developers use. Steps 1 and 2 were commonly thought of as the detection
and removal ofcode smells, that is, of patterns in source code that makes the code diﬃcult
to work with, for example due to overly long methods or too deep nesting of logical
structures [46]. However, later research into how developers refactor (Chapter 2.4-2.5)
found that this is not the main motivation for the application of refactorings. Instead,
developers rather apply refactorings frequently, in small steps, and often interleaved with
other changes [87, 126, 67, 91] for the purpose of preparing or completing functional
software changes [112, 74, 95]. Muprhy-Hill et al. [86] coined the term “ﬂoss-refactoring”
for these types of changes and found that developers often apply them during functional
changes to avoid introducing smells in theﬁrst place. Roberts, Brant, and Johnson
also describe this workﬂow in their original paper on the Refactoring Browser [104].
However, some of the early works on refactoring tool usability was made under the
assumption that the tool should automate the process that Mens and Tourw´ e had laid
out (e.g., [77]), which includes locating and removing code-smells. In contrast, developers
were refactoring to prevent the smells from ever occurring.

--- Page 12 ---

2.3 Refactoring Tool Usability 17
These discrepant workﬂows can give rise to a number of the usability problems once de-
velopers try to replace their manual process with existing refactoring tools. For a simple
example, consider a refactoring tool that is designed to ensure that program behavior
is preserved. When a developer invokes this tool, it might check behavior-related con-
ditions and even present the developer with information about any potential changes to
the program’s behavior. However, the developer might be applying the refactoring with
the intention to progress towards a software change goal, and consequently, they may
be concerned both with the behavior changes but also with how the refactoring tool will
impact subsequent steps in their workﬂow. They may, for example, worry that the tool
will prematurely remove information that they need to understand other areas of the
code, or that the tool will make it more diﬃcult to recover impacted areas later in their
workﬂow. Such usability problems can occur even with tools that are correct.
2.3 Refactoring Tool Usability
Theﬁrst investigation of refactoring tool usability was done by Mealy and Strooper in
2006,ﬁve years after theﬁrst refactoring tool crossed Fowler’s Refactoring Rubicon by
supportingextract-method. The reason why usability of refactoring tools is important
is because the enticing promise of refactoring to make software evolution faster and
cheaper by order an order of magnitude [120] is realized only if developers use the tools
that are available to them. If the tools have usability problems, developers may fail to
use these tools or fail to achieve such gains when trying to use them.
Mealy and Strooper performed a theoretical evaluation of the usability of six refactoring
tools for Java by comparing their capabilities to the steps in Mens and Tourw´ e’s model of
the refactoring process [76]. They concluded that “usability of refactoring tools requires
further research/consideration”. Next, Mealy et al. operationalized the ISO 9241–11
interface design standard [4], again using Mens and Tourw´ e’s refactoring model, and
distilled a list of 81 usability requirements for refactoring tools [77]. While this work was
an important early investigation into the usability of refactoring tools, the premise of
the refactoring process was later found to be subtly diﬀerent. For example, it was found
that developers largely do not use refactoring tools to remove smells, but rather as part
of functional code changes. Thus, some of the requirements formulated by Mealy et al.
are less relevant to tool usability thanﬁrst assumed.
For example, one requirement from Mealy et al. is that the tool must “[a]utomate code-
smell identiﬁcation” [77], which corresponds to Step 1 in Mens and Torw´ e’s model [78],
so for a tool to fully support their model, this is indeed necessary. However, later re-

--- Page 13 ---

18 Background
search has found that refactoring is largely performed as part of functional changes and
for preventative purposes rather than to remove existing code-smells [112, 87, 95]. Con-
sequently, this usability requirement is not necessary for a tool that supports refactoring.
Another guideline is that the tool must “[a]llow suggested changes (to the system being
refactored) to be viewed, changed, or cancelled prior to transformation” [77]. Interest-
ingly, this guideline is in line with current refactoring tools and the practice of oﬀering
the user a Preview View and a Conﬁguration View before the transformation is ap-
plied (Chapter 2.1). However, no studies have shown the eﬀectiveness of Preview Views.
In fact, early studies of developers found that many developers do not inspect these
views [126] a recent survey of developersﬁnds that many developers do notﬁnd these
views eﬀective even today [51].
I take a similar approach to Mealy et al. in Chapter 4 where I operationalize the usability
framework put forth in ISO 9241-11 [5]. However, the approach I took is diﬀerent in
the following aspects: 1) I based the operationalization on recentﬁndings into how and
why developers refactor that diﬀer signiﬁcantly from the process put forth by Mens and
Tourw´ e [78] and that Mealy et al. relied on, and 2) I reﬁne the resulting framework based
on experiences from practitioners and distill a theory of refactoring tool usability that
can be reused by researchers and practitioners, rather than creating speciﬁc usability
requirements and performing a theoretical evaluation of tools.
2.4 Studying Developers’ Refactoring Experiences
While the early research into refactoring tools was largely based on a theoretical under-
standing of how refactoring could be used to evolve software [121, 35, 94], later research
began investigating how developers use refactorings. Learning how developers apply
refactorings manually or how they use existing tools can enable the development of more
eﬀective and satisfying tool support. For example, by learning how often individual
refactorings are applied, toolmakers can prioritize automation of the most frequently
performed refactorings, and by learning ways in which existing refactoring tools are in-
adequate, toolmakers can improve these aspects of the tools. For these reasons, it is
interesting to learn about how developers refactor and whether they use refactoring
tools. If they use tools, it is useful to know how they experience these tools, and if not,
it is interesting to learn why they are avoided.
There are multiple ways to investigate these questions. One way is toaskdevelopers
about their refactoring habits through surveys or interviews. Another is toobserve

--- Page 14 ---

2.4 Studying Developers’ Refactoring Experiences 19
developers as they change software; for example through on-site observational studies,
laboratory studies, or by recording invocations of refactoring tools in their IDEs. One
can alsominerefactorings from source code changes, such as the ones found in open
source code repositories.
2.4.1 Asking Developers
The approach of surveying and interviewing developers is a popular way of learning about
their refactoring behavior. For example, Kim et al. surveyed developers at Microsoft [67],
Sharma et al. surveyed software architects at Siemens Corporate Development Center
India [108], Murphy-Hill and Black surveyed participants at the Agile Open Northwest
conference [89], Lepp¨ anen et al. interviewed software architects and developers from
Finnish software companies [72], and Tempero et al. surveyed a large number of software
developers [118]. Both approaches to collecting information have merits and drawbacks.
Surveys provide a scalable and cost-eﬀective way of collecting information from devel-
opers. It is often preferred due to the high number of responses that can be collected.
However, these surveys are usually kept short and brief and consequently, questions
might be kept somewhat shallow. For example, surveys provide limited possibility for
follow-up questions. In contrast, interviews tend to be conducted in person and are more
time-consuming and less convenient for both the researchers and the subjects. However,
they aﬀord researchers the opportunity to explore the subject more in-depth and to ask
clarifying questions from the subjects. A mix of the two can also be utilized by perform-
ing “interviews” via email to inquire about, for example, source code changes that the
subject has performed during a study [87] or in open-source repositories [112].
In the context of research into refactoring, there is an important limitation of both sur-
veys and interviews. Any methodology that requires developers to respond to questions
about their refactoring and experiences with refactoring tools, suﬀers from a potential
terminology gap in the use of the term “refactoring”.
The researcher might use the term “refactoring” to refer to a change pattern from a
catalogue [46], or to only special kinds of code-editing activities that preserve the pro-
gram’s behavior [94, 98]. Meanwhile, the participant might consider “refactoring” to
refer to bug-ﬁxes, library-upgrades, and to larger architectural changes such as turning
a monolithic software application into micro-services [67, 72, 108, 118, 98]. Lepp¨ anen
et al. describe their participants’ usage of the term in this excerpt from their paper:
“Interviewees usually reserved the word “refactoring” for restructuring and redesigning
the system, as in preparatory or planned refactoring. They didn ’t consider daily small

--- Page 15 ---

20 Background
changes—for example, method renaming and moving the code around a bit—as refactor-
ing.”[72] A similar observation was made by Kim et al. [67] in their study of Microsoft
developers. One of their participants stated:“[Refactoring is] changing code to make it
easier to maintain. Strictly speaking, refactoring means that behavior does not change,
but realistically speaking, it usually is done while adding features orﬁxing bugs.”As a
result, developers may agree with statements like this one“Refactorings supported by
a tool diﬀer from the kind of refactorings I perform manually.”[67] because they are
referring to the lack of tools for micro-service migration.
Moreover, practitioners may be unfamiliar with most or all refactorings that are sup-
ported by tools [51]. Consequently,ﬁndings from such studies are limited because prac-
titioners may respond based on their interpretation of the concept of refactoring or their
awareness of tool support. For example, a developer may estimate that they perform
80 % of their refactoring with tools while the real number is 10 % based on the existing
tool support.
2.4.2 Observing Developers
Observational studies oﬀer an alternative to surveys and interviews, and have the beneﬁt
that theactualdeveloper behavior is collected rather than their self-reported behavior.
In the past, these studies were time-consuming because, similarly to interviews, an ob-
server needed to be present. Today, advances in the techniques for collecting interaction
data from IDEs enable large-scale observational studies of refactoring “in the wild”. For
example, the Mylyn monitor 4 has been used in multiple such studies of refactoring tool
use [86, 126]. This enables investigating how developers interact with refactoring tools
that are available to them in their IDEs during their usual work tasks. Through such
studies, researchers can recognize cases of repetitive invocations, cancellations, and rever-
sions of refactorings as well as common conﬁgurations and patterns of batch applications
[125, 91, 87].
However, when observations are made during regular work tasks, it can be diﬃcult to
compare between developers because they might use diﬀerent IDEs, work on diﬀerent
codebases, and use diﬀerent tools and plugins. Moreover, there might be diﬃcult to get
access to developer’s environments due to concerns about security and code ownership. If
an observational study is conducted as a laboratory study, then it is challenging to create
realistic tasks. In those cases, the tasks used in previous work has typically investigating
refactoring tool use in isolation from other tools, on subgoals that are taken out of
context of an overall change goal (e.g., [84, 50]). While such studies provide valuable
4https://www.eclipse.org/mylyn/, accessed August 14, 2021

--- Page 16 ---

2.5 Studies of how Developers Refactor 21
insights and enable improvements to individual tools, the improvements are not always
compatible with the use of the tool within a larger change. It is also non-trivial to merge
these disparate studyﬁndings into a framework that is shared between tools, since they
focus on diﬀerent tasks and experience measures.
2.4.3 Mining Source Code Changes
Mining studies have become popular ways to quantify the occurrences of individual refac-
torings and evaluate their impact on quality measures. With the increasing popularity
of open-source version control systems, it became possible to apply mining tools to the
source code histories that are stored in these repositories. RefactoringMiner [123] is a
state-of-the-art tool for this purpose and the tool that I used to locate the commits that I
used to build tasks for my laboratory study. By developing algorithms that detect refac-
torings in these version histories, researchers could investigate how refactorings occurred
“in the wild” on a larger scale than before.
By combining this with the aforementioned approaches, researchers can even investigate
the degree of use anddisuseof refactoring tools: if a refactoring is detected both in the
version control history and in the IDE, then the tool was used, whilst if a refactoring is
detected in the version control history andnotin the IDE, then the tool was not used.
Occurrences of the latter can be interpreted as a missed opportunity for the developer
to use the tool.
Unfortunately, even when these mining-based studies focus on tool-supported refactoring
operations they rarely involve the developers who performed the study or the experiences
they had. Only a few studies have combined repository mining with information from
developers’ IDEs make for interesting insights about potential and actual tool use [86,
87, 91, 126]. However, these studies largely do not involve developers. In contrast, Silva
et al. contacted developers who made the commits to ask them about the changes they
made [112].
2.5 Studies of how Developers Refactor
Researchers have employed multiple methods to learn about how developers apply refac-
torings and how they use and experience refactoring tools. These studies show that a
number of refactoring tools are indisuse, such asmove-method,inline-method, and
remove-parameter, and that developers are often perform refactorings in the context of

--- Page 17 ---

22 Background
funcational changes.
Murphy-Hill, Parnin, and Black [87, 86] aggregated and analyzed data from several
datasets: the Eclipse Usage Collector dataset of anonymized Eclipse IDE interactions,
the version control history of the open-source projects Eclipse and JUnit, the refactoring
histories from four developers who maintain Eclipse’s refactoring tools, and volunteer
IDE event data from 41 developers that was collected with the Mylyn monitor and com-
pared with the version control history of the source code these developers were working
on. They used this information to characterize how often diﬀerent refactoring operations
were invoked, completed, and integrated into the code repository. Through their analy-
sis, they found that developers’ refactoring behavior diﬀers from the process that Mens
and Tourw´ e described (so-calledroot-refactoring). Instead, most of the refactorings that
they detected were small and interleaved with other code changes (ﬂoss-refactoring).
Moreover, 90 % of the refactorings that they detected were performed manually, such
as move-member5,inline-method, andremove-parameter. That makes these refactor-
ings interesting to study in order to learnwhydevelopers avoid using the tools to apply
them, and what they do instead. Other researchers have also observed disuse of the same
refactoring operations [126, 67, 112].
Vakilian et al. investigated refactoring tool use by analyzing data from IDEs that cap-
tured developer interactions. They investigated how developers invoked, conﬁgured, and
applied refactoring tools and found further evidence for disuse [126]. Based on their
ﬁndings, the authors conclude that refactoring tools should automate small, predictable
code changes that developers can manually compose into complex changes [127].
Negara et al. also combined the analysis of version control histories and tool interactions
to study how 23 developers applied refactoring during their daily tasks [91]. They found
that over half of all refactorings that they detected to be performed manually and that
30% of them never reached the version control system and corroborated many of the
ﬁndings from the studies by Vakilian et al. [126] and Murphy-Hill et al. [87], such as that
developers prefer to automate small changes and that many refactorings that are applied
in an IDE never reach the version control system. Theirﬁndings further indicate the
need for refactoring tool support with the appropriate usability support and trade-oﬀs
for use in software changes.
Silva et al. used an interesting methodological approach to investigate why developers
use refactorings [112]. They detected refactoring commits to a number of GitHub open-
source projects and immediately query contributors for the motivations behind their
5This refactoring includes both moving member methods andﬁelds but excludes moving static meth-
ods andﬁelds.

--- Page 18 ---

2.5 Studies of how Developers Refactor 23
refactoring operations. They found that refactoring activity is mainly driven by changes
in requirements orfunctionalchanges. They also ask contributors if the refactoring
was performed manually or using a tool. Over half of the respondents report doing it
manually, including formove-method,inline-method. This shows that refactoring tool
usability must be studied in the context of functional changes.
Kim et al. were also interested in how software developers experience refactorings [67].
They conducted a survey of Microsoft employees and more in-depth interviews with a
speciﬁc refactoring team and an analysis of that team’s version history. Their partici-
pants self-reported doing 85% of refactorings manually. In their study, the meaning of
the term ’refactoring’ was broader and refactoring operations likeremove-parameter
was used interchangeably with large quality-improving program changes that occurred
over several years. The latter category of refactorings is less amenable to direct tool sup-
port and varies substantially from the smaller operations for which automated support
appears in development environments. This deﬁnition of refactoring is nonetheless com-
mon in industry and can lead to ambiguity in study results when the type of refactoring is
not deﬁned. In this study, participants also self-reported performingremove-parameter
andinline-methodmostly manually. The survey does not consider use ofmove-method.
Liu et al. were interested in what motivates developers to apply refactorings and fo-
cused their study on theextract-methodrefactoring. Through an analysis of version
histories of open-source projects and interviews of developers, they found reuse to be the
main motivation for performing this speciﬁc refactoring [74], but did not consider how
the refactoring was applied or how the developers experienced it. Paix˜ ao et al. also in-
vestigated why developers apply refactorings and mined code changes from open-source
communities,ﬁnding that refactorings are mainly driven by the intent to introduce or
enhance features [95]. In both cases, developers perform refactorings with a larger goal
in mind, rather than in order to remove smells.
Three other studies that summarize perspectives on refactoring from the industry are
conducted by Sharma et al. [108], and Lepp¨ anen et al. [72], and Tempero, Gorschek,
and Angelis [118]. Through interviews and surveys with industry practitioners, the au-
thors investigate hinderances to refactoring adoption and how practitioners experience
refactoring [72, 118, 108]. All the studiesﬁnd that refactoring tools are not adequately
supported or adopted by practitioners. Sharma et al. concludes that“academia, in-
dustry, and tool vendors must collaborate to create a new generation of more useable,
eﬀective refactoring tools.”[108]
All of these studies found refactoring to be a frequent practice in the evolution of software.
By mining repositories, extracting data about tool use from IDEs, and surveying and

--- Page 19 ---

24 Background
interviewing practitioners, these studies show that refactoring frequently occurs, and
that refactoring tools are often not used. Instead, developers perform most refactorings
manually. Theseﬁndings indicate that there is a high potential for automation which
can save developers from the time-consuming and error-prone manual code changes.
2.6 Factors that Impact the Use and Disuse of
Refactoring Tools
Numerous studies have found that refactorings frequently occur as part of software
changes. Moreover, they also found that the refactoring tools that, in theory, can au-
tomate these code changes are underused by developers. It is interesting to understand
whythis underuse occurs and which factors contributes to it.
Murphy-Hill et al. investigated why developers that they had studied avoided using
refactoring tools by performing followup surveys of 5 of these participants [86, 87]. Vak-
ilian et al. took a similar approach and performed followup interviews with 9 participants
to learn why they avoided using refactoring tools [126]. Silva et al. also found several
factors that impacted whether the authors of repository commits that they surveyed
had used refactoring tools or not [112]. Kim et al. speculate about factors based on
qualitative analysis of their participants’ comments [67]. Negara et al. did a quantitive
investigation of automated refactoring versus manual refactorings and speculated about
factors that could cause theirﬁndings [91]. In addition, Lepp¨ anen et al. [72], Sharma et
al [108], and Tempero et al. [118] report on some factors that prohibit refactoring tool
use based on their studies.
Table 2.1 summarizes the factors that were found to impact refactoring tool use or the
disuse of these tools in these studies. As shown in the table, many of the same factors
occur in multiple studies. Therefore, I organize this section around factors rather than
studies.
Awarenessis a factor that occur across multiple studies. Murphy-Hill et al. refer both
to the developer’s awareness of the refactoring tool’s existence and to their awareness
of performing refactorings [87]. For example, a developer may avoid using a tool to
performinline-methodbecause they are unaware such a tool exists. Negara et al.
also speculate that novices are lessfamiliarwith refactoring tools than experienced
developers and therefore use them less [91]. On the other hand, a developer may be
aware of this tool’s existence but completes the corresponding code changes manually
before they become aware that they are performing aninline-methodrefactoring that

--- Page 20 ---

2.6 Factors that Impact the Use and Disuse of Refactoring Tools 25
Table 2.1: This table contains an overview of the studies that have investigated develop-
ers’ adoption of refactoring tools. For each study, the middle column lists the percentage
of refactorings which are found to be manual in that study and the rightmost column
lists the factors that the authors report prohibit the use of refactoring tools. If a study
did not report this information, the column contains a dash.
Source Manual Factors that prohibit tool use
Murphy-Hill et al. [86, 87] 90 % Awareness, Trust, Opportunity, Touch
Points, Disrupted Flow
Murphy-Hill et al.[84] - Inability to select code, Incomprehensible
error messages
Vakilian et al. [126]>50% Awareness, Trust, Predictability, Naming,
Need, Conﬁguration
Silva et al. [112]>50% Awareness, Trust, Complexity, IDE Sup-
port, Familiarity
Kim et al. [67] 85% IDE support is too low-level, Lack of sup-
port for the types of refactoring developers
want to make
Negara et al. [91]>50% Familiarity, Speed
Lepp¨ anen et al. [72] - Trust
Sharma et al. [108] - Lack of exposure, Finding tools,
Diﬀerential code base
Tempero et al. [118] - Lack of information identifying conse-
quences, Lack of certainty regarding risk,
Diﬃculty translating a refactoring goal
into refactoring operations

--- Page 21 ---

26 Background
could be automated. Vakilian et al. and Silva et al. also suggest that lack of awareness
or familiarity with reafctoring tools prohibit tool use [126, 112]. In addition, Silva et al.
also describe participants who lackedfamiliaritywith the refactoring capabilities of their
IDEs [112]. In the same vein, Sharma et al. refer tolack of exposureandﬁnding tools
as factors that prohibit refactoring tool use [108]. Tempero et al. refer to “diﬃculty
translating a refactoring goal into refactoring operations” which might be hindered by
the developer’s awareness or familiarity with the tools that are available to them [118].
Lack of awareness and lack of familiarity can both be mitigated by education and by
developing tools that automatically recognize that a developer is performing a manual
refactoring. Examples of such tools are BeneFactor [50] and WitchDoctor [45].
Trustis described as a function of usability and reliability by Vakilian et al. [126] who
report that“[w]e found usability to be a more important factor than reliability on users’
trust in a mature refactoring tool like that of Eclipse.”[126, 238] Interestingly, it is un-
clear how to address trust nor what aspects of a tool impacts developers’ trust. Murphy-
Hill et al. describe trust as whether developers have faith in the refactoring tool; lack
of trust indicates a fear of introducing errors or unintended side eﬀects [87]. They pro-
pose to present the user with inspection checklists [86] to improve trust. This is similar
to the Preview View that Campbell and Miller [28] propose to address the developers’
uncertainty of how a tool will change their program or a fear that it will “mangle their
code” [28, p. 1]. Campbell and Miller refer to “predictability” rather than trust, de-
spite describing similar fears to the ones Murphy-Hill et al. propose as related to trust.
Lepp¨ anen et al. mention that their participants “have little trust in automation” but do
not elaborate on what that mean or why [72, p. 68]. Brant and Steimann [24] discussed
whether tool correctness is necessary for developers to trust and use a tool and do not
reach a conclusion. Tempero et al. list “lack of certainty regarding risk” as a factor that
prohibits tool use [118].
Predictabilityindicates the developer’s ability toguessthe result of applying the
tool [126], i.e. how it will change their code (similar to “trust” in [28]). Tempero et
al. also refer to “[l]ack of (..,) information identifying consequences” [118, p. 60] as a
factor that prohibits tool use. Oliveira et al. investigated the predictability of refactor-
ing tools by conducting a survey where developers choose which output they expect from
refactoring operations (e.g., Rename Field and Pull Up Field ) and found that respon-
dents rarely agree about what to expect nor do their expectations align with the behavior
of their IDEs [92]. Developers’ inability to predict a refactoring’s outcome might also
impact their trust in the tool. Vakilian et al. [126] point out that predictability is im-
pacted by complexity: a more complex refactoring is harder to guess the outcome of and,
if it impacts many locations, is harder to verify. Simple, local refactorings, in contrast,
are easier to predict and verify. They suggest. the ability to preview the refactoring as

--- Page 22 ---

2.6 Factors that Impact the Use and Disuse of Refactoring Tools 27
a way to improve predictability. However, Murphy-Hill et al. [86] speculate that devel-
opersﬁnd preview windows insuﬃcient to understand the refactoring’stouch points, i.e.,
the set of places in the code that the refactoring would eﬀect. They also describe that
preview windowsdisruptdevelopers’ﬂowwhen requiring context-shifts into a separate
window.
Conﬁgurationoptions aﬀord users of refactoring tools control over the transformations
that the tool will perform on their code. For example, thechange-signaturein In-
telliJ and Eclipse can be invoked on a method and then be conﬁgured to remove or
add parameters, change the method’s return type, or even the parameter names (Chap-
ter 2.1). Vakilian et al. report that conﬁguration windows introduce additional cognitive
overhead and disrupt developers’ﬂow [126]. Murphy-Hill report that developers rarely
conﬁgure refactorings and instead prefer to tweak the resulting code [87].
Needindicates that the developers are performing code changes that a tool can auto-
mate [126]. Some tools are not used because the operations they automate are rarely
appropriate. This echoesopportunityin [86]: the situation in a developer know that the
refactoring tool exist, but they do not recognize opportunities to apply it. Similarly, in
Silva et al.’s work, if a refactoring has too low of a complexity, participants indicate that
there is no need to use a tool [112]. These contradicting observations indicate that some
tradeoﬀmust be made in the design of tools.
Namingindicates that hard-to-understand names of refactoring tools act as a barrier for
developers inﬁnding and trying tools [126]. This was also brieﬂy mentioned in [86] and
addressed in [88] with gesture-based menus. Other works that has approached this prob-
lem is Lee, Chen and Johnson with Drag-and-Drop invocation of refactorings [71] and
several works that can recognize a manual refactoring and invoke refactorings to com-
plete it [45, 50, 100]. Some of these eﬀorts aimed at addressing this factor overlap with
the eﬀorts related toawarenessandfamiliarity, such as the detection and completion
of manual refactorings. Toolmakers can also address this factor by simplifying refactor-
ingnames. One example of this is the decision to keep only high-level names like move
andchange-signaturein the refactoring menu of IntelliJ and Eclipse, and then use
techniques like Conﬁguration View and automated detection of program elements to de-
termine the exact refactoring (Chapter 2.1). However, this can cause other problems,
such as the eﬀort required to conﬁgure refactorings and an inability to understand how
to invoke the right refactoring.
Complexityis both used to explain avoidance of tools due to lack ofneedto auto-
mate overly simple refactorings [112] and the diﬃculty of using overly complex refac-
torings [126]. Multiple studies have found that developers more often automate simple

--- Page 23 ---

28 Background
refactorings and perform complex refactorings manually, even for refactorings that are
supported by refactoring tools [91, 126, 87].
IDE supportindicates that the IDE does not support a refactoring operation [126].
Lack ofawarenessornamingmay contribute to developers falsely claiming this as a
reason. However, many of the refactoring activities that developers perform may not be
supported by IDEs. This can be mitigated by implementing support for more refactoring
operations and support for a wider variety of programs. However, this might negatively
impact thecomplexityof tools, thepredictabilityandtrustof tools, and developers may
still not haveawarenessof these additional operations.
Diﬀerential codebaseis listed as a factor by Sharma et al. [108]. They explain this as
follows:“We want to focus on assessing and improving only the changed or newly added
parts in the source code, and refactoring tools can ’t run only on this diﬀerential code
base”[108, p. 47]. This is an interesting problem, and one that has not beed addressed
in research that proposes tool improvements.
Some factors relate to speciﬁc usability problems that arise from the tools’ user interface.
Murphy-Hill and Black [84] investigated usability problems with theextract-method
refactoring tool and found that developers had problems selecting the right code seg-
ments and problems understanding error messages. They acted on this information by
proposing tools that could aid in making a correct code selection and proposing more
understandable error messages. Several of the speciﬁc changes that they proposed, such
as more understandable error messages forextract-method, were incorporated into the
Eclipse refactoring tool.
While previous research has identiﬁed multiple factors that prohibit the use of refactoring
tools, acting on these factors to improve the adoption of tools is not a trivial matter.
Some factors can be isolated and addressed. While some factors can be isolated and
addressed individually, others are tangled, diﬃcult to deﬁne and address, and in some
cases contradicting. For example,awarenesscan be tackled through education and
support of invocations through manual changes andIDE supportcan be improved by
increasing the number of refactorings that an IDE supports. Meanwhile,trustand
predictabilityhave been persistent topics in the research of refactoring tool usability, yet
there is no agreed-upon deﬁnition of exactly what makes refactoring tools trustworthy
or predictable.
Addressing such tangled and ill-deﬁned factors are complicated by their contradictions.
For example, a toolmaker might be able to improveIDE supportand make a tool more
ﬂexible by increasing the number of situations a tool can work in and even accept some
erroneous invocations. However, in doing so, the tool’strustworthinessmight be reduced

--- Page 24 ---

2.7 Software Changes 29
because it will occasionally introduce errors. As another example, a toolmaker might
increase the tool’strustworthinessandpredictabilityby limiting the accepted invocations
to programs that can be easily analyzed and transformed. However, that might reduce
theIDE supportbecause there may be many situations in which the tool can not be
applied. Refactoring tools cannot always both meet developers desires and be fully
correct [24]. As aﬁnal example,namingandawarenesscan be addressed by simplifying
the invocation of refactorings through automated detection and simpliﬁed names. That,
however, might result in lesspredictabletools as the developer might accidentally invoke
the wrong refactorings. Such design tradeoﬀs must be made by toolmakers who wish
to improve the usability of refactoring tool. This illustrate the challenges in addressing
factors that prohibit the use of refactoring tools.
2.7 Software Changes
As refactoring tools support developers’ work on software change tasks, one might expect
studies of software changes to provide insights into how refactoring tools are used and
experienced during these activities. Unfortunately, studies of software change tasks tend
to focus on such aspects as how software artifacts are altered through the change process
or the questions developers ask as the change progresses, without investigating the role
of tools as part of the change process (e.g., [111, 96]).
The need for software tools to help support change to software systems has been recog-
nized for many years (e.g., [65]). While the need for tools has been evident, our under-
standing of what kinds of tools are needed, how those tools function and how developers
can best match tools to tasks is still evolving.
Early software change studies focused primarily on how developers approach compre-
hending the software they must change. Researchers developed models to try to explain
how individual developers comprehend source code (e.g., [114, 97, 129]). At the time
these models were developed, tools such as textual search and compilers were already
prevalent. However, these models focused on human cognition models without consid-
ering how tools interplayed with the comprehension process. Flor and Hutchins took a
diﬀerent approach, considering programming as a complex activity in which multiple de-
velopers work collaboratively on maintenance tasks [44]. They described a distributed
cognition model, but they also described the role tools played for developers in their
study in helping them enact one out of several alternative strategies to tasks in their
study. Although these insights were not drawn out as majorﬁndings, their work marks
a consideration of how tools and tasks interact. Our work continues this direction of

--- Page 25 ---

30 Background
inquiry.
Drawing on the importance of program comprehension for software change tasks, re-
searchers have honed in on speciﬁc activities that form part of a change task and the
speciﬁc tools used to support those activities. For example, Starke et al. studied how
programmers use search tools as part of program comprehension activities undertaken
during corrective maintenance tasks [115]. Fleming et al. usedinformation foraging the-
oryto evaluate tools for debugging, refactoring and reuse tasks [43] and found that these
tools can alleviate the foraging activities that developers otherwise do manually.
As research on software change progressed, there became an increasing focus on under-
standing developer work practices during software change tasks, considering the chal-
lenges developers faced and how to support those challenges with tools. Singer et al.
report on the work practices of professional developers and use insights from the discov-
ered practices to design a tool to support software maintenance [113]. Ko et al. used a
laboratory-based experiment to study the diﬀerent approaches of multiple developers to
corrective and perfective maintenance tasks and used insights gained to suggest design
requirements for tooling aimed at supporting software maintenance tasks [68]. Sillito et
al. conducted a laboratory-based study to consider the goals developers formed when
performing software change tasks and how developers used tools available to perform
those goals. From these observations, they described opportunities for further tool de-
velopment to better support the developers [110]. However, none of these works has
focused on refactorings as part of the change tasks.
Rajlich presented a phased model of the software change process that included refactor-
ings as part of functional changes [99]. Their work, however, related to a higher-level
view of these activities and did not include descriptions of how developers interleave the
use of tools in these phases or how refactoring tools can better support them. In an
unpublished paper, Wilson et al. [130] considers how the change propagation tool JRip-
ples [27] supports such activities. JRipples uses code dependencies to supportchange
impact analysis[21] andchange propagation[26] by providing the developer with a check-
list of locations in the code that might aﬀected by a change. Buckley et al. has identiﬁed
refactoring tools as another means of change propagation [26], but rather than using any
code dependencies, refactoring tools propagate changes according to speciﬁc rules [46].
Despite the similarities between these types of tools, they are not typically compared in
studies.

