Transcript for: SOLID - Dive Into Design Patterns.pdf

Source PDF: SOLID - Dive Into Design Patterns.pdf



--- Page 1 ---

SOLID Principles
Now that you know the basic design principles, let’ s takea
look at Yve that are commonly known as the SOLID princi-
ples. Robert Martin introduced them in the book Agile Software
Development, Principles, Patterns, and Practices1.
SOLIDis a mnemonic f or Yve design principles int ended to
make software designs more understandable, Ze xible and
maintainable.
As with everything in life, using these principles mindlessly
can cause more harm than good. The c ost of applying these
principles into a program’s architecture might be making it
more complicated than it should be. I doubt that there ’s a suc-
cessful software product in which all o f these principles are
applied at the same time. Striving f or these principles is good,
but always try to be pragmatic and don’t tak eeverything writ-
ten here asdogma.
1.Agile Software Development, Principles, Patterns, and Practices:
https://refactoring.guru/principles-book
51 SOLID Principles #192534
elle4139@gmail.com (#192534)

--- Page 2 ---

Single Responsibility Principle
A class should have just one reason tochange.
Try to makeevery class responsible f or a single par tof the
functionality provided by the software, and make that respon-
sibility entirely encapsulat ed by (you can also sayhidden with-
in) theclass.
The main goal o f this principle is reducing c omplexity.You
don’t need to invent a sophisticated design for a program that
only has about 200 lines o fcode. Make a dozen methods pret-
ty, and you’llbeYne.
The real problems emerge when y our program c onstantly
grows and changes. At some point classes be come so big that
you can no longer remember their details. C ode navigation
slows down to a crawl, and you haveto scan through whole
classes or even an entire program t o Ynd speciYc things. The
number of entities in program o verZows your brain stack, and
you feel that you’re losing control over thecode.
There’s more: if a class does t oo many things, y ou haveto
change it every time one of these things changes. While doing
that,you’re risking breaking other par ts of the class which you
didn’t even intend tochange.
52 SOLID Principles / Single Responsibility Principle #192534
elle4139@gmail.com (#192534)

--- Page 3 ---

If you feel that it’s becoming hard tofocus on speciYc aspects
of the program one at a time, remember the single responsibil-
ity principle and check whether it’s time to divide some classes
intoparts.
Example
TheEmployeeclass has several reasons to change. The Yrst
reason might be related to the main job of the class: managing
employee data. However, there’s another reason: the f ormat of
the timesheet report may change over time, requiring you to
change the code within theclass.
BEFORE: the class contains several differentbehaviors.
Solve the problem by moving the behavior relat ed to printing
timesheet reports into a separate class. This change lets y ou
move other report-related stuff to the newclass.
AFTER: the extra behavior is in its o wnclass.
53 SOLID Principles / Single Responsibility Principle #192534
elle4139@gmail.com (#192534)

--- Page 4 ---

Open/Closed Principle
Classes should be open f or extension but closed f or
modiYcation.
The main idea of this principle is t okeep existing code from
breaking when you implement newfeatures.
A class isopenif you can extend it, produce a subclass and
do whatever you want with it —add new methods or Yelds,
override base behavior,etc. Some programming languages let
you restrict further extension of a class with special keywords,
such asfinal.After this, the class is no longer open. A t the
same time, the class is closed(you can also saycomplete) if it’s
100% ready to be used by other classes—its interface is clearly
deYned and won’t be changed in the future.
When I Yrst learned about this principle, I was c onfused
because the wordsopen&closedsound mutually exclusive.
But in terms of this principle, a class can be both open (f or
extension) and closed (for modiYcation) at the same time.
If a class is already de veloped, tested, reviewed, and includ-
ed in some framework or otherwise used in an app , trying to
mess with its code is risky. Instead of changing the code of the
class directly,you can create a subclass and o verride parts of
the original class that y ou want to behave differently.You’ll
54 SOLID Principles / Open/Closed P rinciple #192534
elle4139@gmail.com (#192534)

--- Page 5 ---

achieveyour goal but also w on’t break any existing clients of
the originalclass.
This principle isn’t meant t o be applied for all changes toa
class. If you know that there’s a bug in the class, just go on and
Yx it; don’t create a subclass for it. A child class shouldn’t be
responsible for the parent’sissues.
Example
You have an e-commerce application with an Orderclass that
calculates shipping costs and all shipping methods are hard-
coded inside the class. If y ou need to add a new shipping
method, you haveto change the code of theOrderclass and
risk breakingit.
BEFORE: you have to change the Orderclass whenever you add a new
shipping method totheapp.
55 SOLID Principles / Open/Closed P rinciple #192534
elle4139@gmail.com (#192534)

--- Page 6 ---

You can solve the problem by applying theStrategypattern. Start
byextracting shipping methods int o separate classes with a com-
moninterface.
AFTER: adding a new shipping me thod doesn’t require changing
existingclasses.
Now when you need to implement a ne w shipping method, y ou
can derive a new class from the Shippinginterface without
touching any of theOrderclass’ code. The client c ode of the
Orderclass will link orders with a shipping obje ct of the new
class whenever the user selects this shipping methods in theUI.
As a bonus, this solution let y ou move the delivery time calcula-
tion to more relevant classes, according to thesingle responsibility
principle.
56 SOLID Principles / Open/Closed P rinciple #192534
elle4139@gmail.com (#192534)

--- Page 7 ---

Liskov Substitution Principle1
When extending a class, remember that y ou should be
able to pass objects of the subclass in placeof objects of
the parent class without breaking the client code.
This means that the subclass should remain c ompatible with
the behavior of the superclass. When o verriding a method,
extend the base behavior rather than replacing it with some-
thing elseentirely.
The substitution principle is a set o f checks that help pre-
dict whether a subclass remains c ompatible with the code that
was able towork with objects of the superclass. This c oncept
is critical when developing libraries and frame works because
your classes are going t o be used by other people whose code
you can’t directly access andchange.
Unlike other design principles which are wide open f or inter-
pretation, the substitution principle has a set o fformal
requirements for subclasses, and speciYcally for their methods.
Let’s go over this checklist indetail.
1.This principle is named b y Barbara Liskov, who deYned it in 1987 in her
workData abstraction and hierarchy :https://refactoring.guru/liskov/dah
57 SOLID Principles / Liskov Substitution Principle #192534
elle4139@gmail.com (#192534)

--- Page 8 ---

• Parameter types in a method o f a subclass should matchor
bemore abstract than parameter types in the method o f the
superclass.Sounds confusing? Let’s have anexample.
◦Say there’s a class with a method that’ s supposed tofeed
cats:feed(Cat c).Client code always passes cat obje cts
into thismethod.
◦Good:Say you created a subclass that overrode the method
so that it can f eed any animal (a superclass o f cats):
feed(Animal c).Now if you pass an object of this subclass
instead of an object of the superclass t o the client code,
everything would still work Yne. The method can f eed all
animals, so it can still f eed any cat passed by theclient.
◦Bad:You created another subclass and restrict ed the feed-
ing method to only accept Bengal cats (a subclass o f cats):
feed(BengalCat c).What will happen t o the client code if
you link it with an obje ct like this instead of with the orig-
inal class? Since the method can only f eed a speciYc breed
of cats, it won’t serve generic cats passed b y the client,
breaking all related functionality.
• The return type in a method o f a subclass should matchor be
asubtypeof the return t ype in the method o f the superclass.
As you can see, requirements for a return type are inv erse to
requirements for parametertypes.
58 SOLID Principles / Liskov Substitution Principle #192534
elle4139@gmail.com (#192534)

--- Page 9 ---

◦Say you have a class with a method buyCat(): Cat.The
client code expects to receive any cat as a result o fexecut-
ing thismethod.
◦Good: A subclass o verrides the method as f ollows:
buyCat(): BengalCat.The client gets a Bengal cat , which is
still a cat, so everythingisokay.
◦Bad: A subclass o verrides the method as f ollows:
buyCat(): Animal.Now the client c ode breaks sinc e it
receives an unknown generic animal (an alligat or? a bear?)
that doesn’t Yt a structure designed f oracat.
Another anti-example comes from the world of programming
languages with dynamic typing: the base method returns a
string, but the overridden method returns a number.
• A method in a subclass shouldn’ t throwtypes ofexceptions
which the base method isn’ texpected to throw.In other words,
types ofexceptions should matchor besubtypesof the ones
that the base method is already able t o throw. This rule comes
from the fact that try-catchblocks in the client c ode target
speciYc types ofexceptions which the base method is lik ely to
throw. Therefore, an unexpected exception might slip through
the defensive lines of the client code and crash the entire
application.
59 SOLID Principles / Liskov Substitution Principle #192534
elle4139@gmail.com (#192534)

--- Page 10 ---

In most modern programming languages, espe cially sta-
tically typed ones (Java, C#, and others), these rules are
built into the language. You won’t be able tocompile a
program that violates theserules.
• A subclass shouldn’ t strengthen pre-c onditions.For example,
the base method has a paramet er with type int.If a sub-
class overrides this method and re quires that the value o f an
argument passed to the method should be positiv e (by throw-
ing an exception if the value is ne gative), this strengthens the
pre-conditions. The client c ode, which used towork Yne when
passing negative numbers into the method, no w breaks if it
starts working with an object of thissubclass.
• A subclass shouldn’ tweaken post-conditions.Say you havea
class with a method that w orks with a database. A method o f
the class is supposed to always close all opened database c on-
nections upon returning avalue.
You created a subclass and changed it so that database c on-
nections remain open so y ou can reuse them. But the client
might not know anything about y our intentions. Because it
expects the methods to close all the connections, it may sim-
ply terminate the program right af ter calling the method, pol-
luting a system with ghost database connections.
• Invariants of a superclass must be preserv ed.This is probably
the least formal rule of all.Invariantsare conditions in which
60 SOLID Principles / Liskov Substitution Principle #192534
elle4139@gmail.com (#192534)

--- Page 11 ---

an object makes sense. For example, invariants o f a cat are
having four legs, a tail, ability to meow,etc. The confusing part
about invariants is that while the y can be deYned e xplicitly
in the form of interfacecontracts or a set of assertions within
methods, theycould also be implied b ycertain unit tests and
expectations of the clientcode.
The rule on invariants is the easiest t o violate because you
might misunderstand or not realiz e all of the invariants o f
acomplex class. Therefore, the safest way toextend a class
is to introduce new Yelds and methods, and not mess with
any existing members of the superclass. Of c ourse, that’s not
always doable in real life.
• A subclass shouldn’ t change values o f private >elds o f the
superclass. What? How’s that even possible?It turns out some
programming languages let y ou access private members of
a class via reZe ction mechanisms. Other languages (Python,
JavaScript) don’t have any protection for the private members
atall.
Example
Let’s look at an example of a hierarchy of document classes
that violates the substitution principle.
61 SOLID Principles / Liskov Substitution Principle #192534
elle4139@gmail.com (#192534)

--- Page 12 ---

BEFORE: saving doesn’t mak e sense in a read-only document, so the
subclass tries to solve it by resetting the base behavior in the
overriddenmethod.
Thesavemethod in the ReadOnlyDocumentssubclass throws
an exception if someone tries to call it. The base method
doesn’t have this restriction. This means that the client c ode
will break if we don’t check the document type bef ore sav-
ingit.
The resulting c ode also violat es the open/closed principle,
since the client code becomes dependent on c oncrete class-
es of documents. If you introduce a new document subclass,
you’ll need to change the client code to supportit.
62 SOLID Principles / Liskov Substitution Principle #192534
elle4139@gmail.com (#192534)

--- Page 13 ---

AFTER: the problem is solv ed after making the read-only document class
the base class of the hierarchy.
You can solve the problem b y redesigning the class hierar-
chy: a subclass should e xtend the behavior o f a superclass,
therefore the read-only document be comes the base class o f
the hierarchy. The writable document is no w a subclass which
extends the base class and adds the saving behavior.
63 SOLID Principles / Liskov Substitution Principle #192534
elle4139@gmail.com (#192534)

--- Page 14 ---

Interface Segregation Principle
Clients shouldn’t be f orced to depend on methods the y
donotuse.
Try to makeyour interfaces narrow enough that client classes
don’t have to implement behaviors the y don’tneed.
According to the interface segregation principle, y ou should
break down “fat” interfaces into more granular and spe ciYc
ones. Clients should implement only those methods that the y
really need. Otherwise, a change t o a “fat” interfacewould
break even clients that don’t use the changed methods.
Class inheritance lets a class hav e just one superclass, but it
doesn’t limit the number o f interfaces that the class can imple-
ment at the same time. Henc e, there’s no need to cram tons
of unrelated methods to a single interface. Break it down into
several more reYned int erfaces—you can implement them all
in a single class if needed. However, some classes may be Yne
with implementing just one ofthem.
Example
Imagine that you created a library that mak es it easy to inte-
grate apps with various cloud c omputing providers. While in
64 SOLID Principles / Interface Segregation Principle #192534
elle4139@gmail.com (#192534)

--- Page 15 ---

the initial version it only suppor ted Amazon Cloud, it covered
the full set of cloud services andfeatures.
At the time you assumed that all cloud pro viders have the
same broad spe ctrum offeatures as Amaz on. But when it
came to implementing suppor tfor another provider, it turned
out that most o f the interfaces of the library are t oo wide.
Some methods describe f eatures that other cloud pro viders
just don’thave.
BEFORE: not all clients c an satisfy the requirements of the
bloatedinterface.
While you can still implement these methods and put some
stubs there, it w ouldn’t be a pretty solution. The bett er
65 SOLID Principles / Interface Segregation Principle #192534
elle4139@gmail.com (#192534)

--- Page 16 ---

approach is to break down the interface into parts. Classes
that are able to implement the original int erface can now just
implement several reYned interfaces. Other classes can imple-
ment only those int erfaces which have methods that mak e
sense forthem.
AFTER: one bloated interf ace is broken down into a set of more
granularinterfaces.
As with the other principles, y ou can go too far with this one.
Don’t further divide an int erface which is already quit e spe-
ciYc. Remember that the more int erfaces you create, the more
complex your code becomes. Keep thebalance.
66 SOLID Principles / Interface Segregation Principle #192534
elle4139@gmail.com (#192534)

--- Page 17 ---

Dependency Inversion Principle
High-level classes shouldn’t depend on lo w-level class-
es. Both should depend on abstractions. Abstractions
shouldn’t depend on details. Details should depend on
abstractions.
Usually when designing so ftware, you can make a distinction
between two levels ofclasses.
• Low-level classesimplement basic operations such as w orking
with a disk, transferring data over a network, connecting toa
database,etc.
• High-level classescontain complex business logic that dire cts
low-level classes to dosomething.
Sometimes people design low-level classes Yrst and only then
startworking on high-level ones. This is v ery common when
you start developing a prototype on a new system, and you’re
not even sure what’s possible at the higher le vel because
low-level stuff isn’t yet implemented or clear. With such an
approach business logic classes t end to become dependent on
primitive low-levelclasses.
The dependency inversion principle suggests changing the
direction of thisdependency.
67 SOLID Principles / Dependency Inversion Principle #192534
elle4139@gmail.com (#192534)

--- Page 18 ---

1.For starters, you need to describe interfaces for low-level oper-
ations that high-le vel classes rely on, pref erably in business
terms. For instanc e, business logic should call a method
openReport(file) rather than a series o f methods
openFile(x),readBytes(n),closeFile(x).These interfaces
count as high-levelones.
2.Nowyou can make high-level classes dependent on those
interfaces, instead of on concrete low-level classes. This
dependency will be much softer than the original one.
3.Once low-level classes implement these int erfaces, they
become dependent on the business logic le vel, reversing the
direction of the originaldependency.
The dependency inversion principle often goes along with the
open/closed principle:you can extend low-level classes to use
with different business logic classes without breaking e xisting
classes.
Example
In this example, the high-le vel budget reporting class uses a
low-level database class f or reading and persisting its data.
This means that any change in the lo w-level class, such as
when a newversion of the database server gets released, may
affect the high-level class, which isn’t supposed t o care about
the data storagedetails.
68 SOLID Principles / Dependency Inversion Principle #192534
elle4139@gmail.com (#192534)

--- Page 19 ---

BEFORE: a high-level class depends on a lo w-levelclass.
You can Yx this problem b y creating a high-le vel interface
that describes read/writ e operations and making the repor t-
ing class use that int erface instead of the low-level class.
Then you can change or extend the original low-level class to
implement the new read/write interface declared by the busi-
nesslogic.
AFTER: low-level classes depend on a high-lev elabstraction.
69 SOLID Principles / Dependency Inversion Principle #192534
elle4139@gmail.com (#192534)

--- Page 20 ---

As a result, the direction of the original dependenc y has been
inverted: low-level classes are no w dependent on high-le vel
abstractions.
70 SOLID Principles / Dependency Inversion Principle #192534
elle4139@gmail.com (#192534)

